Bulletin of the Transilvania University of Braşov  
Series V: Economic Sciences • Vol. 17 (66) No. 2 - 2024 
https://doi.org/10.31926/but.es.2024.17.66.2.3 

 
EXPLORATION AND ANALYSIS OF AMAZON 
CUSTOMER BEHAVIOR - AN IT APPLICATION 
BASED ON CLUSTERING ALGORITHMS AND 
BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE SOLUTIONS 

 
I. M. RUȚĂ1   
D.A. LUPȘA-TĂTARU2 

 
Abstract: The work focuses on exploring and analysing customer behaviour, 
identifying factors that have a significant impact on customers’ level of 
satisfaction, and segmenting the customer sample into groups with similar 
characteristics using data mining, machine learning (ML), and business 
intelligence solutions. (BI). It presents the importance of approaching data 
analysis within the organization, as well as the usefulness of the results 
obtained for enhancing the company's performance.  
 
Key words: behaviour analysis, satisfaction level, machine learning, 
business intelligence, Amazon 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 

The accelerated evolution of e-commerce has led to the need for understanding 
customer behaviour for organizations whose goal is to increase their satisfaction and 
loyalty. E-commerce platforms generate large volumes of data, thus providing companies 
with the opportunity to implement methods for analysing customer behaviour. The data 
are the pulse of a company, and analysing them is fundamental in the process of making 
rational decisions based on real indicators. 

Customer behaviour analysis is a strategic tool that allows companies to adapt their 
processes, enhance user experience, and optimize their marketing strategies.  
Nevertheless, businesses today are facing an onslaught of techniques and models 
dedicated to these analyses, yet few of them know how to leverage them. Companies 
need clear guidelines to implement effective data analysis solutions to efficiently identify 
customer habits, the factors that influence their satisfaction, and consequently, methods 
to utilize the results obtained. The objectives of the research work focus on exploring and 
analysing customer behaviour, identifying the factors that have a significant impact on 
their level of satisfaction, and dividing the customer sample into segments with the same 

                                                 
1 Transilvania University of Braşov, iulia.ruta@unitbv.ro 
2 Transilvania University of Braşov, lupsad@unitbv.ro 

Bulletin of the Transilvania University of Braşov • Series V • Vol. 17 (66) No. 2 - 2024 
 

32 

or similar characteristics. 

Analysing customer interactions and satisfaction levels through data mining and 
machine learning (ML) algorithms provides a data-driven approach to deciphering the 
factors that influence customer decisions. This granular understanding allows for more 
targeted strategies, personalized marketing, and improvements in service quality that 
directly address the needs and expectations of each customer segment.  
Therefore, the need for analysing customer behaviour is evident, and this research 
highlights ways to implement data analysis and interpret its results, as there has been a 
lack of documentation regarding data analysis solutions that serve both a technical 
department, which uses the data for further developments (such as the implementation 
of artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms), and a marketing or management department that 
develops the company's growth strategies.  

 
2. Research in the field 
 

In the specialized literature, there are numerous scientific articles that attest to the 
importance of using data analysis techniques for evaluating customer behaviour and their 
level of satisfaction. The need for the development of these analysis processes is based 
on the significant evolution of electronic commerce.  

The article “An advanced intelligence system in customer online shopping behavior and 
satisfaction analysis,” authored by N. Moon, I. Talha, and I. Salehin in 2021, emphasises 
that, for the emerging growth of the online market, it is essential to understand online 
purchasing behaviour and customer satisfaction. Safety, trust, and product quality play an 
important role in customer satisfaction. The quality of the product, the price of the 
product compared to the local market, the return policy, and the timely delivery of the 
product are also essential elements of online shopping. 

Customer retention has become problematic in the context of the evolution of e-
commerce, as the existence of a developed market encourages customers to experiment 
as much as possible, to choose the lowest prices or the best deals, which leads to a 
constantly changing preference behaviour and induces a degree of business instability, 
while at the same time encouraging a decrease in product quality just to be more 
attractive. In the article "Customer retention through service quality and satisfaction: 
using hybrid SEM-neural network analysis approach" published in 2022, the authors frame 
the provision of a relevant experience for the consumer as a distinctive hallmark of 
marketing activities. Additionally, a positive and engaging customer experience delights 
consumers and leads to their loyalty or to the repurchase of the product/service by 
satisfied customers. 

The evolution of e-commerce is concurrent with the development of data mining 
techniques, the concept of machine learning, business intelligence solutions, as well as 
algorithms based on artificial intelligence. The evolution of these information tools has 
consistently supported the improvement of business strategies for analysing the target 
market and segmenting it. Customer segmentation is a common strategy for grouping 
consumers with similar needs, characteristics, and behaviours. The article "A novel time 
series clustering method with fine-tuned support vector regression for customer 

I.M. RUȚĂ et al.: Exploration and Analysis of Amazon Customer Behavior 
 33 
 
behaviour analysis," published in 2022 by authors H. Abbasimehr and F. Baghery, presents 
traditional segmentation approaches using certain descriptive variables, such as customer 
demographic attributes, as being insufficient. When demographic variables are not 
available or cannot be derived from the available data, the traditional segmentation 
approach cannot be used. The main challenge of the current literature regarding 
customer segmentation is that customers often adopt static segmentation approaches. 
The fundamental disadvantage of static segmentation models is that they treat customer 
segments, and their members as fixed entities, when in reality, customer behaviour is not 
consistent over time and it evolves. Furthermore, using a static customer segmentation 
technique is insufficient, as it leads to the loss of crucial trends and patterns in consumer 
behaviour. Thus, this work contributes to the literature dedicated to the use of customer 
segmentation strategies employing data mining and machine learning methods, based on 
variables that hold value over time, in a context where data analysis becomes a current 
necessity, almost reliant on real-time analyses to identify trends and varied changes in 
customer behaviour, with the aim of finding innovative solutions and benefiting from a 
high degree of accuracy in decision-making support.  
 
3. Research methodology 

 
The analysis conducted is a qualitative one, aimed at highlighting the utility of tools 
based on data mining and machine learning (ML) techniques, alongside business 
intelligence (BI) solutions that complete the digital framework in the field of data analysis.  
The data used in this paper are public data from the company Amazon, intended to serve 
as educational support for conducting data analysis. The dataset, Amazon Consumer 
Behaviour Dataset, published on the Kaggle platform, contains data representing 
consumer responses to a satisfaction survey aimed at analysing consumer behaviour in 
order to identify areas for improvement in the company's operations and products, but 
especially for the development of recommendation systems to personalize consumer 
experiences. The dataset contains twenty questions relevant for identifying customer 
habits and satisfaction levels. The number of customers who provided responses for this 
questionnaire is six hundred consumers.  
 
4. Research results 
4.1. Identifying the characteristics of the clients 

 
The respondents' population comprises 54% (323 respondents) in the 18-30 years age 
range, followed by 24% (144 respondents) in the 31-40 age range. This distribution is 
expected, as these are the age ranges in which the population is much more open to 
online shopping, which is also reflected in the company's data. 

Bulletin of the Transilvania University of Braşov • Series V • Vol. 17 (66) No. 2 - 2024 
 

34 

 
Fig. 1. Age distribution of Amazon clients 

 
Regarding the respondents’ gender, it can be observed that the distribution is not 
uniform for the analysed dataset. A 58% of the respondents (350) identify as female, while 
only about 24% (142 respondents) identify as male. This distribution confirms that female 
respondents exhibit more active shopping behaviour and are more open to providing 
feedback based on their purchases. 

  
 

 
Fig. 2. Age distribution of Amazon clients 
 
4.2. Analysis of variables with significant impact on the degree of satisfaction 

 
The results of the analysis showed that the main factors influencing customer 
satisfaction according to the dataset are: the accuracy of the ratings, the importance given 
to reviews, the frequency of using personalized recommendations, the behaviour in using 
personalized recommendations, and the method of searching for products on the Amazon 
website and app. 

To begin with, the variables that have a significant impact on the level of satisfaction 
were analysed, and relevant metrics were defined to measure customer satisfaction in 

I.M. RUȚĂ et al.: Exploration and Analysis of Amazon Customer Behavior 
 35 
 
relation to the other variables. The data show that, following the analysis, the satisfaction 
level calculated based on the Net Promoter Score (NPS) key performance indicator is 
29.50% (calculated as the difference between 48.67% promoters and 19.17% detractors).  

 

 
Fig. 3. Net Promoter Score 
 

The media on the accuracy rating state that 48% of respondents rate the accuracy of 
the rating at 3, indicating that the scores given to Amazon products do not meet customer 
expectations and this area should see improvements. Furthermore, according to the 
distribution, between 19% and 36% of respondents do not assign a high level of 
importance to reviews. Thus, we can approach the hypothesis that the aforementioned 
accuracy of the rating is directly correlated with the importance given to reviews by 
respondents.  
A percentage of 38% (228 respondents) make purchasing decisions for Amazon products 
based on personalized recommendations sometimes, while 41.67% (250 respondents) do 
not use this type of personalized recommendations at all.  

A percentage of 45.33% of respondents state that they sometimes find personalized 
recommendations useful, while 28.50% of them claim that they do not. Thus, only 26.16% 
of respondents find personalized recommendations truly useful, a distribution that is also 
reflected in the frequency of purchasing the recommended products. 

A percentage of 37.16% of respondents use categories for product search on the 
Amazon website or app, while 35.66% use keywords for searching, and only 21.16% of 
respondents use filters to find their preferred products.  
 
 4.3. Clustering analysis according to variables with significant impact on satisfaction 
level 
   
 The first perspective of clustering is based on the variable that measures the frequency 
with which respondents decide to purchase a product based on a personalized 
recommendation. Respondents who decided to purchase a product based on 
personalized recommendations have the lowest average satisfaction level, specifically 
1.40 out of a maximum of 5. Thus, for these respondents, it can be stated that the 
recommendation system did not meet their expectations and needs improvements. One 

Bulletin of the Transilvania University of Braşov • Series V • Vol. 17 (66) No. 2 - 2024 
 

36 

of the hypotheses considered for this case could be the lack of relevant data for these 
respondents. 
  

 

Fig. 4. Clustering analysis for the variable measuring the frequency of use of personalized 
recommendations correlated with the respondents’ level of satisfaction. 

 
The second perspective of clustering is represented by the utility that customers find in 
personalized recommendations. This variable determines that respondents who find 
these recommendations useful also have the highest average satisfaction level, 
specifically 3.50 out of a maximum of 5. 

 

 

Fig. 5. Clustering analysis for the variable measuring the utility of personalized 
recommendations correlated with the respondents' level of satisfaction. 

 
The third perspective of clustering presents the segmentation of respondents based on 
their product search behaviour on the Amazon website or app, viewed through the lens 
of their level of satisfaction. Although the majority of respondents stated that they most 
often use category selection to reach their desired products, the analysis from the 
clustering reveals that those respondents who utilize filters and keywords to search for 
products have significantly higher satisfaction. The average satisfaction level for 
respondents who use product categories to navigate to their desired products is 1.77 out 
of a maximum of 5.  

I.M. RUȚĂ et al.: Exploration and Analysis of Amazon Customer Behavior 
 37 
 

 
Fig 6. Clustering analysis for the variable 
of product search method correlated with 
the respondents’ level of satisfaction. 

 
Fig 7. Clustering analysis for the variable 
that measures the accuracy of the rating 
value correlated with the respondents’ 

level of satisfaction  
 
Another perspective on clustering is dedicated to the accuracy of product rating values 
correlated with the respondents’ level of satisfaction. Respondents who are completely 
dissatisfied with the accuracy of the rating have an average satisfaction level of 1.57 out 
of a maximum of 5 in the first segment. 

 

 

Fig 8. Clustering analysis for the variable measuring the importance of reviews correlated 
with the respondents’ satisfaction level. 

Bulletin of the Transilvania University of Braşov • Series V • Vol. 17 (66) No. 2 - 2024 
 

38 

The last clustering perspective is dedicated to the importance of product reviews 
correlated with the respondents’ level of satisfaction. Increased attention must be given 
to respondents for whom reviews hold a high degree of importance. Customers for whom 
reviews are important or even very important have an average satisfaction rating of 3.16 
and 2.89 out of a maximum score of 5.  

 
5. Discussions, limitations and conclusions 
 

In a realistic framework, this approach can be used to analyse a company's data, being 
adapted according to the specifics of the data and the management requirements that 
will utilize the results of the analysis. In this paper, the practical applicability of advanced 
data analysis tools was simulated to create both general and detailed insights into 
customer behaviour and the factors influencing their level of satisfaction.  

In this work, a small dataset was used, which optimized the performance of the digital 
tools employed to analyse the data. In a scenario where the volume of data is significantly 
larger, the performance of the data mining, machine learning (ML), and business 
intelligence (BI) tools used can be put to test. Additionally, in a context where the data 
used are characterized by numerous anomalies such as missing values, different data 
types, or the presence of outliers, the analysis conducted would require modifications to 
increase the level of data accuracy. In conclusion, the paper highlights the importance of 
adopting data analysis methods within a company that aims to achieve its long-term goals 
based on understanding customer behaviour, customers’ characteristics, the factors that 
influence their habits, and their level of satisfaction. Thus, the implementation of such a 
solution can be the foundation for the company's strategic decisions aimed at enhancing 
its performance.  
 
References 

 
Abbasimehr, H., Baghery, F., 2022. A novel time series clustering method with fine-tuned 
support vector regression for customer behavior analysis. Expert Systems with 
Applications, Vol. 204. Elsevier. 
Moon, N., Talha, I., Salehin, I., 2021. An advanced intelligence system in customer online 
shopping behavior and satisfaction analysis. Current Research in Behavioral Sciences, 
Vol. 2. Elsevier. 
Otto, P.E., Davies, G.B., Chater, N., Stott, H., 2009. From spending to understanding: 
Analyzing customers by their spending behaviour. Journal of Retailing and Consumer 
Services, Vol. 16(1): 10-18. Elsevier. 
Salamah, A., Hassan, S., Aljaafreh, A., Zabadi, W., AlQudah, M., Hayat, N., Mamun, A., 
Kanesan, T., 2022. Customer retention through service quality and satisfaction: using 
hybrid SEM-neural network analysis approach. Heliyon, 8(2): e10570. 
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/swathiunnikrishnan/amazon-consumer-behaviour-

dataset 